\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@setfilename gslsp.info
@settitle Sparse Matrix Extensions to the GNU Scientific Library
@finalout
@c %**end of header

@dircategory Scientific software
@direntry
* gslsp: (gslsp).                   Sparse matrix extensions to GSL
@end direntry

@c How to use the math macros
@c ==========================
@c 
@c For simple expressions, simply use the @math{} command, e.g.
@c
@c     @math{\exp(x)/(1+x^2)}
@c 
@c but if the expression includes characters that need to be 'escaped'
@c in texinfo, like '{' or '}', or needs different output for TeX and info,
@c then use the following form,
@c
@c     blah blah blah @c{$y^{1+b} \le \pi$}
@c     @math{y^@{1+b@} <= \pi}
@c
@c The first part using @c{} must appear at the end of a line (it reads
@c up to the line end -- as far as texinfo is concerned it's actually
@c a 'comment').  The comment command @c has been modified to capture
@c a TeX expression which is output by the next @math.
@c
@c For ordinary comments use the @comment command.

@tex
% Mathematical macros taken from the GNU Calc Manual
% ==================================================
%
% Some special kludges to make TeX formatting prettier.
% Because makeinfo.c exists, we can't just define new commands.
% So instead, we take over little-used existing commands.
%
% Redefine @cite{text} to act like $text$ in regular TeX.
% Info will typeset this same as @samp{text}.
\gdef\goodtex{\tex \let\rm\goodrm \let\t\ttfont \turnoffactive}
\gdef\goodrm{\fam0\tenrm}
\gdef\math{\goodtex$\mathxxx}
\gdef\mathxxx#1{#1$\endgroup}
\global\let\oldxrefX=\xrefX
\gdef\xrefX[#1]{\begingroup\let\math=\dfn\oldxrefX[#1]\endgroup}
%
% Redefine @i{text} to be equivalent to @cite{text}, i.e., to use math mode.
% This looks the same in TeX but omits the surrounding ` ' in Info.
%\global\let\i=\cite
%\global\let\math=\cite
%
% Redefine @c{tex-stuff} \n @whatever{info-stuff}.
\gdef\c{\futurelet\next\mycxxx}
\gdef\mycxxx{%
  \ifx\next\bgroup \goodtex\let\next\mycxxy
  \else\ifx\next\mindex \let\next\relax
  \else\ifx\next\kindex \let\next\relax
  \else\ifx\next\starindex \let\next\relax \else \let\next\comment
  \fi\fi\fi\fi \next
}
\gdef\mycxxy#1#2{#1\endgroup\mycxxz}
\gdef\mycxxz#1{}
%
% Define \Hat to take over from \hat as an accent
\gdef\Hat{\mathaccent "705E}
%
%\gdef\beforedisplay{\vskip-10pt}
%\gdef\afterdisplay{\vskip-5pt}
\gdef\beforedisplay{}
\gdef\afterdisplay{}
{\globaldefs = 1
\abovedisplayskip=7pt plus 2pt minus 1pt
\belowdisplayskip=7pt plus 2pt minus 1pt
\abovedisplayshortskip=7pt plus 2pt minus 1pt
\belowdisplayshortskip=7pt plus 2pt minus 1pt}
%\abovedisplayskip=12pt plus 3pt minus 3pt
%\belowdisplayskip=12pt plus 3pt minus 3pt
%\abovedisplayshortskip=7pt plus 1pt minus 1pt
%\belowdisplayshortskip=7pt plus 1pt minus 1pt
%\gdef\beforedisplayh{\vskip-25pt}
%\gdef\afterdisplayh{\vskip-10pt}
%
\gdef\arcsec{\hbox{\rm arcsec}}
\gdef\arccsc{\hbox{\rm arccsc}}
\gdef\arccot{\hbox{\rm arccot}}
\gdef\sech{\hbox{\rm sech}}
\gdef\csch{\hbox{\rm csch}}
\gdef\coth{\hbox{\rm coth}}
\gdef\arcsinh{\hbox{\rm arcsinh}}
\gdef\arccosh{\hbox{\rm arccosh}}
\gdef\arctanh{\hbox{\rm arctanh}}
\gdef\arcsech{\hbox{\rm arcsech}}
\gdef\arccsch{\hbox{\rm arccsch}}
\gdef\arccoth{\hbox{\rm arccoth}}
%
\gdef\Re{\hbox{\rm Re}}
\gdef\Im{\hbox{\rm Im}}
\gdef\Sin{\hbox{\rm Sin}}
\gdef\Cos{\hbox{\rm Cos}}
\gdef\Log{\hbox{\rm Log}}
%
\gdef\erf{\hbox{\rm erf}}
\gdef\erfc{\hbox{\rm erfc}}
\gdef\sinc{\hbox{\rm sinc}}
\gdef\sgn{\hbox{\rm sgn}}
\gdef\sign{\hbox{\rm sign}}
\gdef\det{\hbox{\rm det}}
\gdef\Var{\hbox{\rm Var}}
\gdef\arg{\hbox{\rm arg}} % avoid temporary clobbering of arg in texinfo-4.8
@end tex

@include version-ref.texi

@copying
Copyright @copyright{} 2012-2014 Patrick Alken.

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with the
Invariant Sections being ``GNU General Public License'' and ``Free Software
Needs Free Documentation'', the Front-Cover text being ``A GNU Manual'',
and with the Back-Cover Text being (a) (see below).  A copy of the
license is included in the section entitled ``GNU Free Documentation
License''.
@end copying

@titlepage
@title GSLSP
@subtitle Extensions to the GNU Scientific Library
@subtitle Version @value{VERSION}
@subtitle @value{UPDATED}

@author Patrick Alken
@comment @email{alken@colorado.edu}
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top, Introduction, (dir), (dir)
@top GSLSP

This file documents GSLSP, a collection of routines for
constructing and manipulating sparse matrices.

Information about GSL can be found at the project homepage,
@uref{http://www.gnu.org/software/gsl/}.

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License.
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Introduction::
* Sparse matrix allocation::
* Accessing sparse matrix elements::
* Initializing sparse matrix elements::
* Copying sparse matrices::
* Sparse matrix operations::
* Sparse matrix properties::
* Finding maximum and minimum elements of sparse matrices::
* Sparse matrix compressed format::
* Conversion between sparse and dense matrices::
* Sparse BLAS operations::
* Examples::
* References and Further Reading::
* GNU Free Documentation License::
* Function Index::
* Variable Index::
* Type Index::
* Concept Index::
@end menu

@node Introduction, Sparse matrix allocation, Top, Top
@section Introduction

These routines provide support for constructing and manipulating
sparse matrices in GSL, using an API similar to the @code{gsl_matrix}
machinery. The basic structure is called @code{gsl_spmatrix}. There are
two supported storage formats for sparse matrices: the triplet and
compressed column storage (CCS) formats. The triplet format stores
triplets @math{(i,j,x)} for each non-zero element of the matrix. This
notation means that the @math{(i,j)} element of the matrix @math{A}
is @math{A_{ij} = x}. Compressed column storage stores each column of
non-zero values in the sparse matrix in a continuous memory block, keeping
pointers to the beginning of each column in that memory block, and storing
the row indices of each non-zero element. The triplet format is ideal
for adding elements to the sparse matrix structure while it is being
constructed, while the compressed column storage is better suited for
matrix-matrix multiplication or linear solvers.

GSL does not provide a linear sparse matrix solver for @math{A x = b},
since this is a highly complex problem and many advanced software packages
already exist to efficiently solve it. The routines in this section provide
a simple interface to construct a sparse matrix and convert it to a compressed
format, where it can easily be passed to external linear sparse matrix
solvers.

@tpindex gsl_spmatrix
@noindent
The @code{gsl_spmatrix} structure is defined as

@example
typedef struct
@{
  size_t size1;
  size_t size2;
  size_t *i;
  double *data;
  size_t *p;
  size_t nzmax;
  size_t nz;
  size_t *work;
  size_t flags;
@} gsl_spmatrix;
@end example

@noindent
This defines a @var{size1}-by-@var{size2} sparse matrix. The number of non-zero
elements currently in the matrix is given by @var{nz}. For the triplet
representation, @var{i}, @var{p}, and @var{data} are arrays of size @var{nz}
which contain the row indices, column indices, and element value, respectively.
So if @math{data[k] = x}, then @math{x = A(i[k], p[k])}.
For compressed column storage, @var{i} and @var{data} are arrays of size
@var{nz} containing the row indices and element values, similar to the triplet
case. @var{p} is an array of size @math{size2 + 1} where @math{p[j]} points
to the index in @var{data} of the start of column @var{j}. Thus, if
@math{data[k] = A(i,j)}, then @math{i = i[k]} and @math{p[j] <= k < p[j+1]}.

@noindent
@var{work} is additional workspace needed for various operations like
converting from triplet to compressed column storage. @var{flags} indicates
the type of storage format being used (triplet or compressed column).

@noindent
The routines in this extension are defined in the header file
@file{gsl_spmatrix.h}.

@node Sparse matrix allocation, Accessing sparse matrix elements, Introduction, Top
@section Sparse matrix allocation

The functions for allocating memory for a sparse matrix follow the style of
@code{malloc} and @code{free}. They also perform their own error checking. If
there is insufficient memory available to allocate a matrix then the functions
call the GSL error handler with an error code of @code{GSL_ENOMEM} in addition
to returning a null pointer.

@deftypefun {gsl_spmatrix *} gsl_spmatrix_alloc (const size_t @var{n1}, const size_t @var{n2})
This function allocates a sparse matrix of size @var{n1}-by-@var{n2} and
initializes it to all zeros. If the size of the matrix is not known at allocation
time, both @var{n1} and @var{n2} may be set to 1, and they will automatically
grow as elements are added to the matrix. This function sets the
matrix to the triplet representation, which is the easiest for adding
and accessing matrix elements. This function tries to make a reasonable guess
for the number of non-zero elements (@var{nzmax}) which will be added to the matrix by
assuming a sparse density of @math{10\%}. The function
@code{gsl_spmatrix_alloc_nzmax} can be used if this number is known more
accurately. The workspace is of size @math{O(nzmax)}.
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun {gsl_spmatrix *} gsl_spmatrix_alloc_nzmax (const size_t @var{n1}, const size_t @var{n2}, const size_t @var{nzmax}, const size_t @var{flags})
This function allocates a sparse matrix of size @var{n1}-by-@var{n2} and
initializes it to all zeros. If the size of the matrix is not known at allocation
time, both @var{n1} and @var{n2} may be set to 1, and they will automatically
grow as elements are added to the matrix. The parameter @var{nzmax} specifies
the maximum number of non-zero elements which will be added to the matrix.
It does not need to be precisely known in advance, since storage space will 
automatically grow using @code{gsl_spmatrix_realloc} if @var{nzmax} is not
large enough. Accurate knowledge of this parameter reduces the number of
reallocation calls required. The parameter @var{flags} specifies the storage
format of the sparse matrix. Possible values are
@table @code
@item GSL_SPMATRIX_TRIPLET
This flag specifies triplet storage.

@item GSL_SPMATRIX_COMPCOL
This flag specifies compressed column storage.
@end table
The allocated @code{gsl_spmatrix} structure is of size @math{O(nzmax)}.
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun int gsl_spmatrix_realloc (const size_t @var{nzmax}, gsl_spmatrix * @var{m})
This function reallocates the storage space for @var{m} to accomodate
@var{nzmax} non-zero elements. It is typically called internally by
@code{gsl_spmatrix_set} if the user wants to add more elements to the
sparse matrix than the previously specified @var{nzmax}.
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun void gsl_spmatrix_free (gsl_spmatrix * @var{m})
This function frees the memory associated with the sparse matrix @var{m}.
@end deftypefun

@node Accessing sparse matrix elements, Initializing sparse matrix elements, Sparse matrix allocation, Top
@section Accessing sparse matrix elements

@deftypefun double gsl_spmatrix_get (const gsl_spmatrix * @var{m}, const size_t @var{i}, const size_t @var{j})
This function returns element (@var{i},@var{j}) of the matrix @var{m}.
The matrix may be in triplet or compressed format.
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun int gsl_spmatrix_set (gsl_spmatrix * @var{m}, const size_t @var{i}, const size_t @var{j}, const double @var{x})
This function sets element (@var{i},@var{j}) of the matrix @var{m} to
the value @var{x}. The matrix must be in triplet representation.
@end deftypefun

@node Initializing sparse matrix elements, Copying sparse matrices, Accessing sparse matrix elements, Top
@section Initializing sparse matrix elements

Since the sparse matrix format only stores the non-zero elements, it is automatically
initialized to zero upon allocation. The function @code{gsl_spmatrix_set_zero} may
be used to re-initialize a matrix to zero after elements have been added to it.

@deftypefun int gsl_spmatrix_set_zero (gsl_spmatrix * @var{m})
This function sets (or resets) all the elements of the matrix @var{m} to zero.
@end deftypefun

@node Copying sparse matrices, Sparse matrix operations, Initializing sparse matrix elements, Top
@section Copying sparse matrices

@deftypefun {gsl_spmatrix *} gsl_spmatrix_memcpy (const gsl_spmatrix * @var{src})
This function makes a copy of the sparse matrix @var{src} and returns a pointer
to a newly allocated copy, which must be freed by the caller when no longer
needed. The matrix @var{src} may be in either triplet or compressed format.
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun {gsl_spmatrix *} gsl_spmatrix_transpose_memcpy (const gsl_spmatrix * @var{src})
This function computes the transpose of @var{src} and stores it in a newly
allocated matrix which is returned by the function. This matrix should be
freed by the caller using @code{gsl_spmatrix_free} when no longer needed.
The matrix @var{src} may be in either triplet or compressed format.
@end deftypefun

@node Sparse matrix operations, Sparse matrix properties, Copying sparse matrices, Top
@section Sparse matrix operations

@deftypefun {gsl_spmatrix *} gsl_spmatrix_add (const gsl_spmatrix * @var{a}, const gsl_spmatrix * @var{b})
This function adds the two matrices @math{a + b} and stores the result in
a newly allocated matrix which is returned. The result should be freed with
@code{gsl_spmatrix_free} when no longer needed. The two matrices must have the same
dimensions.
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun int gsl_spmatrix_scale (gsl_spmatrix * @var{m}, const double @var{x})
This function scales all elements of the matrix @var{m} by the constant
factor @var{x}. The result @math{m(i,j) \leftarrow x m(i,j)} is stored in @var{m}.
@end deftypefun

@node Sparse matrix properties, Finding maximum and minimum elements of sparse matrices, Sparse matrix operations, Top
@section Sparse matrix properties

@deftypefun size_t gsl_spmatrix_nnz (const gsl_spmatrix * @var{m})
This function returns the number of non-zero elements in @var{m}.
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun int gsl_spmatrix_equal (const gsl_spmatrix * @var{a}, const gsl_spmatrix * @var{b})
This function returns 1 if the matrices @var{a} and @var{b} are equal (by comparison of
element values) and 0 otherwise. The matrices @var{a} and @var{b} must be either
both triplet format or both compressed format for comparison.
@end deftypefun

@node Finding maximum and minimum elements of sparse matrices, Sparse matrix compressed format, Sparse matrix properties, Top
@section Finding maximum and minimum elements of sparse matrices

@deftypefun int gsl_spmatrix_minmax (const gsl_spmatrix * @var{m}, double * @var{min_out}, double * @var{max_out})
This function returns the minimum and maximum elements of the matrix @var{m},
storing them in @var{min_out} and @var{max_out}.
@end deftypefun

@node Sparse matrix compressed format, Conversion between sparse and dense matrices, Finding maximum and minimum elements of sparse matrices, Top
@section Sparse matrix compressed format

GSL supports the compressed column format, in which the non-zero elements in each
column are stored contiguously in memory.

@deftypefun {gsl_spmatrix *} gsl_spmatrix_compress (const gsl_spmatrix * @var{T})
This function creates a sparse matrix in compressed column format
from the input sparse matrix @var{T} which must be in triplet format.
A pointer to a newly allocated matrix is returned. The calling function
should free the newly allocated matrix when it is no longer needed.
@end deftypefun

@node Conversion between sparse and dense matrices, Sparse BLAS operations, Sparse matrix compressed format, Top
@section Conversion between sparse and dense matrices

The @code{gsl_spmatrix} structure can be converted into the dense @code{gsl_matrix}
format and vice versa with the following routines.

@deftypefun int gsl_spmatrix_d2sp (gsl_spmatrix * @var{S}, const gsl_matrix * @var{A})
This function converts the dense matrix @var{A} into sparse triplet format
and stores the result in @var{S}.
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun int gsl_spmatrix_sp2d (gsl_matrix * @var{A}, const gsl_spmatrix * @var{S})
This function converts the sparse matrix @var{S} into a dense matrix and
stores the result in @var{A}. @var{S} must be in triplet format.
@end deftypefun

@node Sparse BLAS operations, Examples, Conversion between sparse and dense matrices, Top
@section Sparse BLAS operations

GSL supports a limited number of BLAS operations for sparse matrices.

@deftypefun int gsl_spblas_dgemv (const double @var{alpha}, const gsl_spmatrix * @var{A}, const gsl_vector * @var{x}, const double @var{beta}, gsl_vector * @var{y})
This function computes the matrix-vector product and sum
@math{y \leftarrow \alpha A x + \beta y}, where @var{A} is sparse and the vectors @var{x}
and @var{y} are dense. The matrix @var{A} may be in triplet or compressed format.
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun {gsl_spmatrix *} gsl_spblas_dgemm (const double @var{alpha}, const gsl_spmatrix * @var{A}, const gsl_spmatrix * @var{B})
This function computes the sparse matrix-matrix product
@math{C = \alpha A B}. A pointer to the newly allocated matrix @var{C} is returned
and should be freed using @code{gsl_spmatrix_free} when no longer needed. The
matrices @var{A} and @var{B} must be in compressed format.
@end deftypefun

@node Examples, References and Further Reading, Sparse BLAS operations, Top
@chapter Examples

@node References and Further Reading
@chapter References and Further Reading

The algorithms used by these functions are described in the
following sources:

@node GNU Free Documentation License
@unnumbered GNU Free Documentation License
@include fdl.texi

@node Function Index
@unnumbered Function Index

@printindex fn

@node Variable Index
@unnumbered Variable Index

@printindex vr

@node Type Index
@unnumbered Type Index

@printindex tp

@node Concept Index
@unnumbered Concept Index

@printindex cp

@bye
